---
layout: post
title: "Fn types"
date: 2012-05-07T16:27:00Z
comments: true
categories: [Rust, FnTypes]
---
As you loyal readers know, I am on a quest to make the Rust type
system more *orthogonal* with respect to the kind of pointer in use,
by which I mean that I want to have the three pointer sigils (`@`,
`&`, and `~`) indicate where memory is located and the other types
indicate what value is to be found at that memory.  Right now there
are a few cases where we conflate the two things into one type.  The
first, vectors and slices, I discused in a recent post.  This post
discusses the second case: function and interface types.

I'll sketch out the idea; there are however some details I have yet to
work out.  Actually the plan imposes some downsides and I'm not 100%
sure if I'm in favor yet.  Though I think the simplicity of the type
system is a win (simplicity for people using it, that is).

## Background

We currently have five function types:

- `fn@(S) -> T`, or "boxed closure";
- `fn~(S) -> T`, or "unique closure";
- `fn&(S) -> T`, or "stack closure";
- `fn(S) -> T`, or "any closure";
- `native fn(S) -> T`, or "bare function".

What distinguishes these closures is both the kind of pointer in which
their environment is stored as well as the kind of data which can be
stored in the closure itself:

- The boxed closure (`fn@`) uses a normal GC'd pointer (oft called a
  boxed pointer, but I am trying to move to more descriptive
  terminology) to store its environment. The environment may contain
  arbitrary values but it does not contain any references to the
  stack.  Copying a boxed closure is cheap because the environment can
  be aliased (currently, this means that the environment is ref
  counted).
- The unique closure (`fn~`) uses a unique pointer to store its
  environment.  All data must be *sendable*, which basically means
  tree-shaped.  Copying a unique closure is expensive, because the
  environment cannot be aliased, and so copying the closure results in
  a deep copy of all the closed-over data.  This has the upside that
  unique closures can be sent between tasks.
- The stack closure (`fn&`) uses a reference to store its environment.
  Unlike the other closures, no data is stored in the environment
  itself.  Rather, the environment consists of pointers to an outer
  stack frame.  Copying a stack closure is *very* cheap.  Because
  `fn&` contains by-ref pointers into its parent stack frame, it is
  restricted in where it can appear (though these restrictions can
  probably be loosened some the work on lifetimes is complete).
- The any closure (`fn`) is just the supertype of the other three.  It
  commonly appears in function signatures where any sort of closure
  would be acceptable (`vec::each()`, for example).
- A bare function (`native fn`) is just a function pointer with no
  environment at all (it is therefore not a closure at all).  It is
  never used in practice, as it is in fact a subtype of the various
  closure types.
  
One important detail is that closures are represented as the pair of a
function pointer along with a pointer to the environment.  In the case
of a bare function, the pointer to the environment is always `NULL`.

## The proposal

I want to have just one function type.  In practice, as today, this
would most commonly be written as `fn(S) -> T`, but the type in its
fully explicit glory would be:

    fn:kind(S) -> T

Like my proposed vector type `vec<T>`, this function type has an
unknown static size.  At runtime, it would be represented by a
structure like:

    struct fn {
        void *code_ptr;
        ... // environment data is stored inline
    };

As with `vec<T>`, the type `fn(S) -> T` has an unknown size and
therefore must basically always be referenced by pointer (`@fn(S) ->
T`, `~fn(S) -> T`, `&fn(S) -> T`).

The `kind` portion of the function type indicates a bound on the
closed over data.  It can by `copy` or `send`.  If it is omitted, then
there is no bound.  In practice, I imagine that `send` is the only
kind that would ever be useful.

The mapping between the current function types and my proposal would be:

    fn@(S) -> T         becomes        @fn(S) -> T
    fn~(S) -> T         becomes        ~fn:send(S) -> T
    fn&(S) -> T         becomes        &fn(S) -> T
    fn(S) -> T          becomes        &fn(S) -> T
    native fn(S) -> T   just goes away
    
## Details
    
### Literal syntax

I can imagine a couple of alternatives here.  The basic issue is
distinguish between "closures that reference things on the stack
frame" and "closures that copy things out of the stack frame".

I think my preferred solution is to say that the explicit `fn` form
*always* copies out of the stack frame.  So something like:

    let foo = fn@(x: int, y: int) -> int { x + y };

would become
    
    let foo = @fn(x: int, y: int) -> int { x + y };

Note that there is no bound specified (indicating no bound on the
closed-over data).  Of course, any data that gets copied into the
closure must be copyable; but if data is *moved* into the closure (for
example, if it is the last use of the data, or an explicit capture
clause is used), then the data can have any kind.  This is the same as
today.

If we wanted a unique closure, which today is written:

    let foo = fn~(x: int, y: int) -> int { x + y };
    
you would write    

    let foo = ~fn:send(x: int, y: int) -> int { x + y };
    
This is somewhat wordier than today, but the truth is that we rarely
(if ever) write unique closures by hand.  Instead, you employ the
sugared closure form.

### Sugared closures

Sugared closures are written using a Ruby-like notation:

    for vec.each { |item| ... }    // inferred to stack closure
    
    task::spawn {|| ... }          // inferred to unique closure

They would continue to operate as today.  This means that we'll infer
the kind of closure pointer and other facts based on the expected
type.  I am still not crazy about this inference (although I put it
in) but the last time I proposed taking it out this was unpopular.
    
### Bare functions

One advantage of the current approach is that a bare function (which
is just a function pointer) can be converted into a closure by pairing
it with a null pointer.  This no longer works under this system except
for region pointers, so when bare functions are converted to `@` or
`~` functions we'd have to allocate a little stub to convert the call.
Maybe the sigil should be written explicitly, so that function items
have a type of `fn(S) -> T`.  You would then write `vec::iter(v,
&foo)` to apply the top-level function `foo` to each item in the
vector, for example.  Hmm.

## Summary

So yeah, that's the rough idea.  I feel like the current system does
work more smoothly in some regards, so I'm not yet sure if the idea is
overall a win, but I wanted to note it down.
