---
categories:
- Rust
comments: true
date: "2012-04-06T00:00:00Z"
slug: for-loops
title: For loops
---

First off, I want to welcome [Brian Anderson][brson] to the Rust blog-o-sphere
(which so far consists primarily of myself).  His [first post][post1]
does a great job of explaining how to use the new `for` syntax that
was recently added to Rust: this syntax allows for `break`, `ret`, and
`cont` from within user-defined loops, which is very nice.

Reading some of the [Hacker News comments][hn]
([this one in particular][hnc]), I wanted to clarify one thing.  There
is some concern that this new syntax changes the semantics of `ret`
when, in fact, it aims to do precisely the opposite.

The goal is that `ret` always returns from the innermost enclosing
`fn()` declaration.  Sugared closures (e.g., `{|x| ...}`) do not count
as an fn-declaration, but a closure written out with `fn()` does.  If
you use `ret` from a context where the compiler cannot generate a
return from the innermost enclosing `fn()` declaration, a static error
results.

Here are some examples of what I mean.  First, the basic `for` loop:

    fn foo() {
        for each(v) {|e|
            ret e; // returns from foo()
        }
    }

Here I am using an `fn@()` closure:

    fn foo() {
        let bar = fn@() -> T {
            for each(v) {|e|
                ret ...; // returns from bar()
            }
            ret ...; // returns from bar()
        };
        
        ret ...; // returns from foo()
    }

and here is an example where an error results:

    fn foo() {
        iter(v) {|e|
            ret e; // should return from foo(), but cannot
        }
    }

Note that returning out of sugared closures like `{||...}` is only
allowed in the context of a `for` loop, since it requires additional
code generation to support.

[brson]: http://brson.github.com/
[post1]: http://brson.github.com/rust/2012/04/05/new-for-loops/
[hn]: http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=3806152
[hnc]: http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=3807365
