---
layout: post
title: "Update"
date: 2012-02-01 20:50
comments: true
categories: [Rust, PL, PJs, JS]
---

It's been a while since I wrote anything on the blog! A lot has been
going on in the meantime, both in Rust, parallel JavaScript, and
personally...I hate to write a big update post but I gotta' catch up
somehow!

### Rust

First, we made our 0.1 release, which is great.  We are now planning
for 0.2.  The goal is to make frequent, relatively regular releases.
We're still in such an early phase that it doesn't seem to make sense
to literally release every few months, but at the same time we don't
plan to wait long.

Lately I've been working on several issues, some major, some minor.
The most exciting to me has been [#1493][1493], which vastly improved
our performance when working with thread-local boxes.  There is still
[work to be done on box performance][1737], but before taking any next
steps more investigation is needed.  The problems may be creating type
descriptors, they may be garbage collection, etc.  This is also a
first step to
[simplifying some of the scarier parts of the Rust runtime][1739].

On a smaller note, I've been working on a new iteration library that
I'm reasonably excited about, based on the principles from
[an earlier blog post][composingblocks].  Making it nice to use will require a
[lighter bind syntax][1649], which I've almost got complete now.
This also (as a side effect) improves our type inference somewhat.
One final thing I'd like to do is integrate support for
[break and cont][1619] into the library, though some details remain to
be discussed there.

Finally, I'm beginning work now on cross-crate inlining.  I plan to
write a post later exploring some of the dynamics of this.  It's an
interesting problem.  It's clearly important for performance, though:
functions like `vec::iter()` are used ubiquitously and we need to be
able to inline their definitions.  This is also where Rust's emphasis
on static dispatch can really pay off (not that it is not helpful
already at reducing dispatch costs).

### Parallel JavaScript

I have been progressing on the parallelism work that occupied the
[last few posts][pjposts].  First, the parallel JavaScript work now
has an official name: the [PJs project][pjs].  That github project is
not that useful at the moment, though: I am in the process of moving
the code from an [older GitHub project][pjs-old] into the new one
which contains the rest of mozilla-central.

What exists today is a (very) simple multi-threaded infrastructure
that will run JavaScript functions in parallel, multiplexing them over
a fixed number of workers.  Right now though there is no data sharing
between threads.  I am working on the membrane approach.

I have also had some discussions with the [Rivertrail][rivertrail]
group.  The Rivertrail definition of an elemental function dovetails
very well with my own ideas, so it seems like the two projects could
be fruitfully combined: the PJs API can be used both for task-based
parallel tasks and for those instances where vectorization either
fails or is not effective.

Finally, I drew up a [Java-based prototype][patpar] of the API as well
as the [static type system that I described earlier][typesys].  Having
this prototype gives me confidence that the approach will work, as I
found it quite easy to parallelize a number of interesting examples.

### Whew!

Man, I didn't realize how much stuff has been going on.  No wonder I
haven't had time for blog posts!  And this isn't even a complete list,
really.  But it's everything that's interesting, I suppose. 

[1493]: https://github.com/mozilla/rust/issues/1493
[1737]: https://github.com/mozilla/rust/issues/1737
[1739]: https://github.com/mozilla/rust/issues/1739
[1619]: https://github.com/mozilla/rust/issues/1619
[1649]: https://github.com/mozilla/rust/issues/1649
[pjs]: https://github.com/nikomatsakis/pjs
[pjs-old]: https://github.com/nikomatsakis/pjs-old
[patpar]: https://github.com/nikomatsakis/patpar
[typesys]: {{ site.baseurl }}/blog/2011/12/09/pure-blocks/
[rivertrail]: https://github.com/RiverTrail/RiverTrail
[pjposts]: {{ site.baseurl }}/blog/2012/01/09/parallel-javascript/
[composingblocks]: {{ site.baseurl }}/blog/2011/12/29/composing-blocks/
