---
layout: post
title: "#Rust2018"
categories: [Rust]
---


As part of #Rust2018, I thought I would try to writeup my own
(current) perspective. I'll try to keep things brief.

First and foremost, I think that this year we have to **finish what we
started and get the "Rust 2018" release out the door**. We did good
work in 2017: now we have to make sure the world knows it and can use
it. This primarily means we have to do stabilization work, both for
the recent features added in 2017 as well as some, ahem,
longer-running topics, like SIMD. It also means keeping up our focus
on tooling, like IDE support, rustfmt, and debugger integration.

Looking beyond the Rust 2018 release, **we need to continue to improve
Rust's learning curve**. This means language changes, yes, but also
improvements in tooling, error messages, documentation, and teaching
techniques. One simple but very important step: more documentation
targeting intermediate-level Rust users.

I think we should focus on **butter-smooth (and performant!)
integration of Rust with other languages**. Enabling incremental
adoption is key.[^duffy] This means projects like [Helix][] but also
working on [bindgen][] and improving our core FFI capabilities.

[^duffy]: If you've had altogether too cheerful of a day, go and check out [Joe Duffy's RustConf talk on Midori][midori]. That ought to sober you right up. But the takeaway here is clear: enabling incremental adoption is crucial.

[Helix]: http://usehelix.com/
[bindgen]: https://github.com/rust-lang-nursery/rust-bindgen
[midori]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CuD7SCqHB7k

Caution is warranted, but I think there is room for us to pursue a
select set of advanced language features. I am thinking primarily of
**const generics, procedural macros, and generic associated
types**. Each of these can be a massive enabler. They also are fairly
obvious generalizations of things that the compiler currently
supports, so they don't come at a huge complexity cost to the
language.

It's worth emphasizing also that **we are not done when it comes to
improving compiler performance**. The incremental infrastructure is
working and en route to a stable compiler near you, but **we need to
shoot for instantaneous build times after a small change** (e.g.,
adding a `println!` to a function).

(To help with this, I think we should start a benchmarking group
within the compiler team (and/or the infrastruture team). This group
would be focused on establishing and analyzing important benchmarks
for both compilation time and the performance of generated code. Among
other things, this group would maintain and extend
[the `perf.rust-lang.org` site][perf]. I envision people in this group
both helping to identify bottlenecks and, when it makes sense, working
to fix them.)

[perf]: http://perf.rust-lang.org/

I feel like we need to do more **production user outreach**. I would
really like to get to the point where we have companies other than
Mozilla paying people to work full-time on the Rust compiler and
standard library, similar to how Buoyant has done such great work for
tokio. I would also really like to be getting more regular feedback
from production users on their needs and experiences.

I think we should try to gather some kind of limited **telemetry**,
much like what [Jonathan Turner discussed][jntrnr]. I think it would
be invaluable if we had input on typical compile times that people are
experiencing or -- even better -- some insight into what errors they
are getting, and maybe the edits made in response to those
errors. This would obviously require opt-in and a careful attention to
privacy!

[jntrnr]: http://www.jonathanturner.org/2018/01/rust2018-and-data.html

Finally, I think there are ways we can **offer a clearer path for
contributors and in turn help grow our subteams**. In general, I would
like to see the subteams do a better job of defining the initiatives
that they are working on -- and, for each initiative, forming a
working group dedicated to getting it done. These "active initiatives"
would be readily visible, offering a clear way to simultaneously find
out what's going on in Rust land and how you can get involved. But
really this is a bigger topic than I can summarize in a paragraph, so
I will try to revisit it in a future blog post.

### A specific call out

If you are someone who would consider using Rust in production, or
advocating for your workplace to use Rust in production, I'd like to
know how we could help. Are there specific features or workflows you
need? Are there materials that would help you to sell Rust to your
colleagues?

### Footnotes
