---
layout: post
title: Rust 2020
categories: [Rust]
---

Technically speaking, it's past the deadline for #rust2020 posts, but
I'm running late this year, and I'm going to post something anyway.
In this post, I am focusing on what I see as the "largest scale"
issues, and not on technical initiatives. If I have time, I will try
to post a follow-up talking about some of the key technical
initiatives that I think we should focus on as well.

# TL;DR

* We should do an edition, and we should plan for it now
* The time is ripe to talk about encouraging investment from companies
* A foundation is perhaps part of the solution, but not the whole
  solution; we should encourage active participation from stakeholders
* Organizational improvements can also encourage investment
* Organizationally, we've done a lot in 2019, and we can do more in 2020

# We should think on longer timescales

One of the questions we asked this year was whether we should plan for
a Rust 2021 edition. I feel pretty strongly that the answer is yes.
There are a few reasons for this.

I think one of the biggest parts for me is that I think it is very
healthy for us to be planning on a 3-year timescale. The fact is that
many of our projects these days take years to bring to completion. It
is good for us to talk about roadmaps, but it is also good for us to
look to a slightly longer horizon.

I don't necessarily think this kind of "long range" planning should be
about specific goals and features, but more about areas of
focus. Moreover, I think we should be careful to control our ambitions
-- I think for example that, in thinking about 2019, we outlined a
number of features that are far more realistic on a multi-year
timescale.

# Plan for edition changes early

Editions also, of course, give us the option to make changes we
couldn't otherwise make. For those who aren't familiar, editions let
us make "backwards incompatible" changes to Rust -- but in a way that
keeps old code working. These changes might be something as small as
adding a keyword, or as large as the module reform we made in
Rust 2018. The beauty of editions is that, since they are opt-in at a
crate granularity, we are able to keep supporting older crates
seamlessly. This means we can improve the language gradually without
forcing the entire ecosystem to upgrade in a coordinated fashion.

In Rust 2018, we made a number of these sorts of "migrations":

* We modified `use` statements to introduce the `use crate::foo` notation
* We transitioned to the `dyn Trait` syntax
* We introduced a few keywords

Crucially, we also provided **tooling** to automate these migrations.
This is what made changes like the first change possible at all, since
that change affected almost every crate ever written.

I don't expect us to do anything as dramatic as changing `use`
statements in Rust 2021, but I am confident we are going to want to
make a few backwards incompatible changes. I don't know exactly what
they will be yet, but I do know that **now** is the time to start
planning them -- we want to be front-loading that kind of work so that
we can have time to work on the documentation, migration tooling, and
other things that we will need.

[Yosh's #rust2020 post][yosh] covered this topic quite well, I think. In
the [timeline section], he breaks down the time available, concluding with:

[timeline section]: https://blog.yoshuawuyts.com/rust-2020/#timeline
[yosh]: https://blog.yoshuawuyts.com/rust-2020/

> All together that leaves us with about 12 months total to plan and
> prepare the next edition release, starting January 2020. This should
> be enough time to successfully plan and draft a new edition, with
> some slack to work with.

# We are seeing increased investment from many companies

2019 marked a real turning point when it comes to companies using and
supporting Rust. I remember the time when everybody I met who used
Rust was a hobbyist. Then we started to see startups and [smaller
companies experimenting with Rust][tilde], looking for a way to boost
their productivity when writing low-level systems code. And now we
have major companies like Microsoft, Amazon, Facebook, and Google
adopting Rust for major projects. Somewhat unexpectedly, to me anyway,
Rust has become the language of choice for a lot of Blockchain
companies.

[tilde]: https://www.rust-lang.org/static/pdfs/Rust-Tilde-Whitepaper.pdf

This increasing adoption has also begun to translate to increased
investment in Rust itself. [Microsoft] and [Amazon], for example, are
now sponsoring the majority of Rust's CI costs. A big part of the
async-await development was done by developers on Google's Fuschia
team. And so forth.

[Microsoft]: https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/update-on-the-ci-investigation/10056/9?u=nikomatsakis
[Amazon]: https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/opensource/aws-sponsorship-of-the-rust-project/

# But we need more people paid to work on Rust

Nonetheless, for Rust to really thrive, we need to see more people
paid for their work on Rust teams. As Erin put it in [her #rust2020
post][erin],

> When 1.0 launched there was ~30 members of The Rust Programming
> Language, now in 2019 we have ~200 members. This is nearly 7x the
> amount of members, yet we've changed very little to be able to adapt
> to this growth. No where is this more evident than out of the now
> 200 or so members, the number that are paid for their time on Rust
> is still in the single digits, and this doesn't look to change any
> time soon.

[erin]: https://xampprocky.github.io/public/blog/rust-2021/

One thing I've observed time and time again is that bigger, complex
projects really require dedicated leadership and organization -- and
this often takes vast amount of time. I talked some about this in my
post on ["More than coders"][mtc]. The plain fact is that this kind of
time is often unavailable on a volunteer basis.

[mtc]: http://smallcultfollowing.com/babysteps/blog/2019/04/15/more-than-coders/

# Shifting the focus from *adoption* to *investment*

In year's past, when we thought about companies and Rust, a big part
of the focus was on encouraging **adoption**. But I think at this
point it's time for us to start encouraging **investment**. There are
a lot of companies using Rust now, and the time is ripe to ask
ourselves **how we can help those companies to help Rust**.

But when we ask those questions, I want us to be careful in our
thinking. I don't think there's a single, simple answer for how to
increase investment in Rust. In fact, I don't even think there's a
single answer to **what investment is**. I would love, of course, to
see more people hired to work 100% on Rust. But there are so many
other ways to invest in Rust:

* Sponsoring Rust conferences, meetups, or other social events
* Sponsoring employees to attend the Rust All Hands
* Encouraging employees to spend work time working on Rust as a sort
  of "20% project"
* Building ecosystem libraries that everyone can use 
* Sponsoring Rust's CI or other infrastructure
* Sponsoring the Rust All Hands, Increasing Rust's Reach, or other
  Rust org initiatives direectly
* Using contracting or grants to support the maintainers of
  the Rust project or key figures in the Rust ecosystem

# Many are stronger than one

Even though Rust was started by Mozilla, Mozilla never wanted to "own"
Rust. **We've always wanted Rust to have its own identity and to be
supported by many companies and groups, big and small.**
Fundamentally, this is because having many stakeholders makes for a
better, more robust language. Part of what accounts for Rust's success
is that we've attracted a diverse set of contributors, who were able
to push us to improve the design in any number of ways.

I mention this because, as we talk about money, I think we will also
need to address the question of whether to form a Rust foundation. I
am increasingly thinking that this is a good idea. I think that having
a central legal entity that represents Rust could solve some
challenges for us, for example, and I also think having a central bank
account could help for "group funding" of infrastructure, events like
the Rust All Hands, or programs likes Increasing Rust's Reach. But I
**don't** expect this Rust foundation to directly "solve the problem"
of paying people to work on Rust, nor do I think it should. I would
expect it rather to be one piece of a larger puzzle.

Whatever we wind up with, I think it's important to encourage
companies that use Rust to employ key figures that actively
participate in the Rust organization (whether that be full- or
part-time). We don't want a setup where the Rust organization is the
foundation, supported financially by others. We want a setup where the
Rust organization is directly composed, as much as possible, of its
users and stakeholders, all working together.

# Improving our organization can lead to increased investment

I think a lot of the changes we need may be more **organizational**
than specifically to do with money. For example, I enjoyed reading
[Parity's #rust2020 post][parity], and I was particularly struck by
this paragraph (emphasis mine):

[parity]: https://www.parity.io/rust-2020/

> For many of the issues raised above, we are also happy to jump in
> and help out–and on other issues as well. We are a Rust company
> after all—we believe in the language, its ecosystem and the
> community, and want to be a valuable participant in it. ... However,
> it’s often unclear whether the work is worthwhile. **To a business, it
> is hard to argue that one might spend a month or two working on a
> new feature without any assurance that the approach taken would be
> accepted.**

This is something that's been on my mind quite a bit lately as well.
**If you are a company or organization that would like to help make
changes to Rust, how do you go about it?** I've been getting this
question more and more lately as I go and talk to
companies. Sometimes, the question pertains to a single feature, like
custom test frameworks, or custom allocators.  Other times, the
question is about a broader initiative -- think of the [Sealed Rust]
pitch that Ferrous Systems posted some time back.

[Sealed Rust]: https://ferrous-systems.com/blog/sealed-rust-the-pitch/

In principle, the RFC process is supposed to help serve these needs,
but I don't think in practice it's working very well. I think though
that we can tweak and improve our system to overcome some of those
shortcomings. What's more, if we do, I think that same system won't be
specific to **companies**. After all, if you're a volunteer
contributor interested in pushing on a specific feature, you face the
same the problem. (This, for example, is precisely the problem that
[shepherding] is taking aim at.)

[shepherding]: http://smallcultfollowing.com/babysteps/blog/2019/09/11/aic-shepherds-3-0/

# 2019 saw a lot of progress in organizational matters

Organizationally, I'm quite proud of all the work that we did during
2019, even though I still think we've got a lot of room to go. Just
looking at the compiler team, for example, we really refined the
concept of working groups, we clarified the concept of [compiler team
contributors][ctc], and we introduced other innovations like the
[weekly design meetings]. These meetings have meant not only that we
just have a lot more communication as a team, they're also great for
people looking to eavesdrop and learn more about how the compiler
works. The lang team is [publishing its minutes][minutes] and
(frequently) recordings of our meetings, which are also open for
anyone to attend; the core team is also [publishing recordings][ct] on
a best effort basis. The intrastructure team has made great strides in
documenting their procedures on [forge][forge], as have other
teams. At the project level, we introduced the [leadership sync
meeting][sync], the [Inside Rust blog][irb], and we've been trying to
get a [governance-focused WG][gov] off the ground.

[forge]: https://github.com/rust-lang/core-team/tree/master/minutes/project-leadership-sync
[sync]: https://github.com/rust-lang/core-team/tree/master/minutes/project-leadership-sync
[ct]: https://github.com/rust-lang/core-team/blob/master/minutes/core-team/meetings.md
[lt-minutes]: https://github.com/rust-lang/lang-team/tree/master/minutes
[ctc]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2689-compiler-team-contributors.html
[weekly design meetings]: https://rust-lang.github.io/compiler-team/about/steering-meeting/
[irb]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/
[gov]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/inside-rust/2019/11/13/goverance-wg-cfp.html

# We can do even more in 2020

Over the next year, I'd like to see more progress on how the project
operates. Some of the goals I think we should be working towards:

* active mentorship to help leads formulate roadmaps and plans, as was
  discussed in the [recent compiler-team retrospective][retro]
* documenting all of our governance procedures and other details on [forge]
* more transparency about our priorities, and a clearer process for
  requesting that something be *made* into a priority
* improving *followthrough* and avoiding [unbounded queues][uq]; when
  we start designing a feature, we should see that effort through to
  the end before we pick up new things
* extending our governance to cover "cross-cutting projects", which
  draw on the expertise from many teams; right now, for example, the
  "handoff" between the lang team doing the design for a feature and
  the compile team starting to implement is informal and often just
  fails to happen

[retro]: https://rust-lang.github.io/compiler-team/minutes/design-meeting/2019-11-16-Working-Group-Retrospective/
[uq]: http://smallcultfollowing.com/babysteps/blog/2019/07/10/aic-unbounded-queues-and-lang-design/

# Conclusion

As I wrote in the beginning, I've not tried to address technical
initiatives in this post. I have thoughts on those too, and I think I
will try to do some follow-ups there. In summary, for Rust 2020, I
believe:

* We should do a 2021 Edition, and we should start the planning now.
* We've succeeded at encouraging Rust *adoption*, and we should start thinking about encouraging *investment*.
* Improving how the Rust organization operates continues to be a
  pressing need, and will help everything, including investment.

